Public Program, Santa Cruz
18th October, 1981
Indian words in green at:
First file: 15min 40s and 55s, 43min 32s and
37s,
Second file: 18min 37s, 19min 29s and 32s,
26min 27s, 33min 8s, 39min 11s, 39min 45s,
Last night I was really very happy to meet
you all and I was thinking how I could reach
you so spontaneously. It was a great thing
to cherish the moments of meeting you. I went
into your beings, to your problems yesterday.
That Gregoire has said that you all have got
mostly the left-sided problem not so much
the right side, means ego is not so much there
as your left-sided problem. And the left-sided
problem is the problem that comes to you because
of certain mistakes you have committed in
your seeking. So doesn’t matter, it can
be worked out. The basic of the left-sided
problem comes because I think you didn’t
get the love of your parents also in your
childhood. One of the biggest problems is
that of the mother’s problem that you didn’t
feel that security when you were a child,
to begin with. It’s a mother’s side. Left
side is a mother’s side.
The another thing could be that when you went
into the society they tried to create diffidence
in you by their own norms and ideas about
life, you see, their idea of success is very
different from the idea of a seeker. Because
for a seeker the only success he can have
is when he has found out the truth, you see.
That’s what he is seeking. And if one child
is born who is a seeker in a family who doesn’t
know what a seeking is, they are just seeking
money or something else like that which is
very superficial and nonsensical for a seeker,
the diffidence grows in him gradually in the
subconscious, and he starts thinking that,
“Are we mad or is something wrong with us
or are we something strange people? What’s
happening to us? So how is it that we are
so much different from the rest of the people
who are madly doing other things so much involved,
and we don’t find the fun in that.”
So the left side starts getting accumulating
that diffidence within yourself. Then you
find some friends who are with you; you find
people who talk the same language, sort of
thing, that they are seekers, they have to
seek and they have to seek something. But
the another diffidence that starts afterwards
when you become a group or sort of this whole
thing becomes known to people who are, say,
in the market, we can say, who are in the
market. Who are just trying to mobilize their
money into new channels, where they can make
some money, you see. So these people when
they come to know about such a group which
is still uncertain, does not know where to
go, what to do. You see it’s a very vulnerable
society. Very vulnerable society because there’s
nothing established. They don’t know what
to do? [If?] they realize that these people
are wasting their time, the other people who
are doing other seeking like money and all
those things, they understand that, but they
cannot also understand what they should do.
So it’s a very vulnerable, a very risky
type of a life they lead. And in that risk
the first hit comes when they give up their
parents, you see. Because of the parent’s
attitude towards them, they have to give up.
And the parents in America, I was surprised,
are really not at all kind to their children.
They have only rights, they have no duties,
I feel. I mean it’s just the other way round
you need. They have no duties for their children.
They are rich people, they don’t look after
your, I mean, needs, nothing. I mean it’s
something surprising. The other day somebody
told Me a story that if the son is having
a party or something and he’s enjoying himself
with his friends, then if he puts the music
little loud, the mother in the other house
would ring up the police and ask the police
to arrest this fellow. I mean this is ... one
can’t imagine in India On the contrary if
the mother, if she knows that the boys are
going to have the party, she’ll go all out
to prepare something nice for them, and how
to make them happy. And she would disappear
from there so that their age group should
enjoy themselves. I mean, this is a very common
practice in India.
So many such things, you know, have crawled
up because of, I think, war. I would place
it to one of the things is war. Because of
war your parents got disturbed and they got
upset. Let’s also give them some praise
about it, all right. So they were all very
much frantic and disturbed and their nerves
were broken. Let’s take it like that. Now
whatever it happened ... then also the material
advancement, so-called, through your industrial
development, came through, all right. That
also puts such a pressure on them. I mean,
if somebody has a TV, you must have TV. If
you don’t have a TV, then you are a gone
case. If he has some plastics, you must have
some plastics. They have some nylons, you
must have some nylons. You see, this competition
was in accumulating these things all the time,
and the machines they were trying to create
more and more of this nonsense because they
are hungry things, you know. So they were
consuming all the Mother’s Earth and converting
it into all these nonsensical things, which
now is a big mountain and is a big problem
for you to how to dispose them out.    And
the people in the households were trying to
compete with others in this kind of a nonsensical
pursuit. You see, the whole thing was a chaos
for you, because you are born with a different,
different awareness within you because you
are awakened to a fact that material things
are not going to give you joy. And this is
what was difficult for you to convince your
elders. And the elders also got into the funny
ideas of Freud, I should say, and all the
people started writing books about nonsensical
things, how to treat your children, how to
behave towards them. It’s something absurd,
I can’t believe. It’s shocking when I
hear. I mean there was a girl in Switzerland,
she told Me that, “My child who was only
one and half month,” or something like that,
“died in his bedroom.” I said, “In his
bedroom? I can’t understand. wWhat is that?”
She said, “We don’t [let?make?] our children
sleep with us.” I mean, I can’t understand.
You just can’t understand how can you leave
... I mean, you can’t sleep if your children
are not with you. You just can’t sleep,
you are so worried. And this is something
you see from the very childhood if you are
left in another room, you feel... I mean you
must be frightened. And I don’t know what
must be happening to you. I mean, when I give
you realization, I’m even worried about
you, “Now what’ going to happen to these
children who have got realization. I have
to leave somebody here to look after you,
to consolidate it, to manage it, to make you
grow, otherwise you might be frightened.”
It’s really, it is so. With this one feels
very much disturbed and whom to blame? You
see, you cannot blame anyone. The whole thing,
you can say, it was to be like this. So accept
it as it is. But it has harmed you on the
left hand side. So to begin with, in your
psyche, I would say, the problem started from
the right from the time you were born. Now
you took your birth with your choice. You
decided to be born to these parents. You thought
them to be sane people - maybe your mistake.
And then you took your birth in this great
country which had also some greatnessabout
it, no doubt, which I will tell you now, what
is the greatness of this country is, why you
were born in this country.    And then
thirdly that you had to live with your own
nature, you could not take to the nature of
other people, and the difference between the
two, the gap was so great that you just couldn’t
manage it, you see, and you have to get out
of it. And once you are out of your home,
you are absolutely vulnerable to these people
who are attacking you because you are not
yet matured enough to face them, you are quite
young. And you are suddenly attacked. Your
innocence is attacked.
Then now you should not do this to your children.
That is very important. But now the children
are going to be very powerful people. Now
look at the matured ones sitting here, just
like great grand old mothers, you see. They
are watching the things ... like when I went
back, these two boys, one without a shirt,
one with a shirt standing there, I said, “What
you are doing here?” They said, “We are
looking after all the crooks who are trying
to go inside and we are protecting You from
them.” These two little things. One was
so big [INAUDIBLE] they have put all their
toys there to fight, you see, all the crooks
that are going in, so they are all standing
there both of them. So it’s like that.
You see, these great children are to be born,
no doubt, but in between is your generation
which is a very important generation for Me
because you are the foundation of that great
kingdom, the Kingdom of God. So you are also
very important.
So the first thing you have to do as I said
to say that, “Mother I’m not guilty.”
Do not take anything upon yourselves. Say
that, “Mother, I’m not guilty.” You
don’t blame yourself for anything. All right,
first thing.    Secondly is that the
left side gives you a kind of a diffidence.
It’s such a vicious circle. You get a diffidence,
all right. Because of diffidence you do not
get your realization, maybe. Even if you get
you realization, you go little bit coming,
little bit going, you see, all the time and
you get more diffident. Then the vicious circle
starts. The diffidence again stops your feeling
the vibrations, again you get into diffidence,
you start blaming yourself and hating yourself,
again it goes in a very bad vicious circle.
So first and foremost thing for all of you
is to have complete confidence into your faith
that you have to seek something beyond. [Firstly?]
this is the first faith you should have that
you have to seek something beyond and whatever
you were doing, maybe mistaken, doesn’t
matter, but your aims were correct. Your aims
were perfect and your aims were correct. All
right!    Now the second thing you have
to know in yourself that you are not all these
things like the worldly things that you see
but you are the Spirit. You are the Spirit.
Now believe that you are. Do not have diffidence
because you have failed so far, doesn’t
matter whatever has happened. Ultimately if
you find it, you find it. So second thing
you have to know, second thing you have to
know that you are the Spirit. This is the
second point, and I was, gradually, yesterday
strengthening your left side of which you
are not aware. Perhaps you think that you
are very egoistical. Some people think like
that and that this is the ego. But mostly
whatever ego you had is also finished because
the way they were bumping at it, you see,
so it is [hurt ego?] and it may become a guilt
within you, [with?] “Oh, I should not have
done this, I should not have done this, I
should not have…” No use worrying about
these things. No use going back onto it. So
because of this, you see, the left side, which
is a very important side in Sahaja Yoga, is
affected and it starts right from the Swadhisthana,
in the Swadhisthana Chakra. As I told you
that I’m going to tell you about your chakras
but more related to the left side. Left side
as ... Gregoire has written a book “Advent”
in which he describes it as the sin against
the Mother. And the right side he says the
sin against the Father. Not the mother who
has given you the birth, but the Shakti, the
primordial Mother, the Power of God’s Love.
Sin against Her is the left side and the sin
against the Father is the right side. So countries
which are developing now like India, you see,
they are trying to develop into your style,
they are going to have plastics and nylons
and everything. Then they’ll take to drugs,
then they’ll become hippies and then this
will happen and then I’ll have to give them
realization. Before going all these circles
they are not going to listen to Me. They don’t
want to short circuit it, you see, so let
them go ahead with it. They are now developing.
All these countries who are developing they
should come and see you and meet you and know
what development has given you. This kind
of material ... you are understanding it so
well, but they will not. If you tell them
[that?], they can’t believe it.    You
will be surprised when I go to India I have
to take nylon saris for them. Though we get
very beautiful silks in India, they don’t
think there’s much about it, you see. They
think why don’t You bring some nylons for
them. So this is what it is, you see, they
don’t understand. And this is the thing
I told you that the Kundalini is in India
but they are not awakened. You people have
realized the value of matter. You people have
realized that matter doesn’t give you the
joy. You have to go beyond it, specially nylons
and plastics. At least this much you understand.
But you go to any sophisticated Indian family,
they’ll give food in stainless steel. Though
they may have brass they think, “Oh, stainless
steel is great,” you see. All the rich people
will take out their stainless steel. Even
if they will have silver, they think stainless
steel is great. Can you imagine? So, this
is the state in which they are, while you
have reached that state where you do realize
the aesthetics, the aesthetics of the matter.
Aesthetics of the matter you understand. So
you have in one side, on the right side, you
have achieved quiet a lot, I should say, and
you should be confident on that style at least
that you understand the worthlessness of all
these man-made things. [That?] something so
great to achieve that you want to have something
that is God-made. Once you come to that point
you should also know that if you have to have
realization it cannot be man-made it has to
be God-made.    Now the left side is
important here so I’ll talk about left side.
But you should not feel hurt about it because
I have to point it out to you to understand
the mistakes and the things which should not
be repeated. But the right side mistakes are
committed, as I told you, in the people who
are developing. So I [will?] mention you to
do that part what happens to the right side
when we commit mistakes on the right side.
What we do is we don’t believe that there
is God, who is your Father. You forget that
there is Father above you. And He’s the
one who’s going to look after you. So you
don’t have to worry so much about earning
money by any crooked method or by any means
without any values to earn money. To be worried
about money, to be worried about your wellbeing
is absurd. Krishna has said, “Yogakshema
vahamyaham.” He said, “You get your yoga.
If you get your yoga, then you get your kshema”-
means your wellbeing. The other day somebody
asked Me, “What is the way to Lakshmi?”
Is first to get [to?] your yoga. Why didn’t
He say kshema yoga …. ? He said, “Yoga
kshema vahamyaham,” first yoga. First you
get united with your divine force and then
your wellbeing is looked after. It is looked
after. Even if I tell you the stories of that,
you won’t believe to what extent it looks
after your kshema also. You don’t become
Mr. Ford because that’s madness. You become
a person who is provided for, who is looked
after and who never feels the dearth that
there is no money with you. That’s what
is, kshema is. In which your health improves,
material things improve, everything improves
once you have got yoga which is promised by
Shri Krishna six thousand years back. I’m
not saying something new; it was said about
six thousand years back. So you become a realized
soul. By becoming realized soul you realize
that your Father God Almighty is the richest
man in the whole world. He has everything.
From where does it come? It comes from Him.
Riches that we think are riches are not really
riches. The one He gives you, the one He provides
you are miraculous.    These are miraculous
things, and when it happens… I’ll give
you one example for this. Like in London,
you see, we didn’t have any place for the
boys to live in and girls to live in, they
wanted to form an ashram. There was a lady
who bought a place because she had sold her
place, she bought a place, adilapidated, ruined
place in Lambeth Vale. Of course you’ll
be surprised that William Blake has said,
because I laid the foundations there, and
he said it that, “The foundations will be
laid in Lambeth Vale.” He said that, “England
is going to become Jerusalem.” And he said,
“In Lambeth Vale the foundations will be
laid.” Imagine this William Blake and his
prophecies. I stayed first in Surrey Hills.
He has written that, “The first beacons
will be lit in Surrey Hills.” Can you believe
this man, how good he was in prophesying.
Whatever it is, this ashram could only provide
rooms for very few boys and girls, and big
problem for them. So they said, “Mother,
we have to have some more places to live in,
and what are we to do?” I said, “All right,
now you pray for it. Just ask.” And a boy
came with an idea we should form a co-op.
So they were not willing to form a co-op.
They said, “Mother, it takes ten years to
get a nice place in co-op. It’s useless.”
I said, “If you say so, just go ahead.”
So they formed a co-op. Can you believe within
one month’s time they got a huge building
with fifteen large bedrooms and big halls
and all that for them to stay, paying only
seventy pounds for the whole building in one
week, can you imagine? Then after a month
they got a huge big, very,very big hotel with
all things there, beds and linen and cutlery
and crockery and everything that you could
think of, paying only seventy pounds per week
for all. Such a huge big thing where about
twenty-five people can easily live, and they
have got halls and basements and this and
that. We had sixteen marriages on the Krishna
Ashtami day. And all these newly married couples
stayed in that hotel very nicely paying nothing,
because you don’t need have to pay there.
But these boys [INAUDIBLE] I don’t know
what they did among themselves. But this is
what it is. This is the kshema. And, such
beautiful atmosphere in that place. Everybody
enjoying the pure knowledge and the pure love.
Now, we are on the left hand side
and when I will discuss about the chakras,
I’ll be dealing, pertaining more to the
left side and not to the right side, which
is the side, which we say is of material wellbeing
or say how do you get your physical wellbeing.
You also get your physical wellbeing through
this.    Now as you see here, the first
chakra is very important. Because you see
the connection is established with the left
hand side, is a very, very important center,
is the center of your innocence. The first
thing God created on this Earth was innocence.
And this innocence is embodied in a deity
whom we call as Shri Ganesha. This deity was
created long, long time back, much before
anything started on this Earth. The omega
and the alpha as you can call it. And He incarnated
on this Earth as Lord Jesus Christ. I was
told that I have to be careful because there
are many people who just don’t believe in
Jesus Christ. This is a very big conditioning
of people because they are born in families
who don’t want to believe in Christ. Whether
you like it or not, He exists. Not only He
exists but He’s the only one who can really
give us the path from here.    So the
first one is the center of our innocence.
And this center of innocence was kept there
at a position where it manifests in the gross
our pelvic plexus, which looks after the excretion
of the body. As there are four, we can say
the petals of this subtle center, in the same
way there are four sub-plexuses for the pelvic
plexus. I don’t know how many have done
medicine here. But the pelvic plexus has got
four excretory sub-plexuses. One of them is
responsible for sex. Now the idea of sex that
has come to us is from people like Mr., say,
Freud. Now look at his life. What sort of
a life he led. He had bad relations with his
own mother. He’s a perverted fellow. Secondly,
see, look at his [sense?]. In his own life
[you?] should see the light of a person. Then
secondly that he had cancer for years together
and he died with cancer. So physically he
was nonsensical, mentally he was a pervert.
Yes, I mean you must see the person whom you
try to follow, all right. So, it’s so logical.
Now, you see his life as it is. He taught
you, “Oh, that if you try to condition yourself
about sex, and if you marry someone, and youare
married to one person and then you are attached,
it’s conditioning of the society.” But
he was half-baked. Because you are not only?
your left side, you see. If you say that,
“What’s wrong if I do this? What’s wrong
if I do that? What’s wrong if I do that?”
If you go on like this, then you forget the
other side, which is the ego, which is the
ego side. And then the ego side develops,
and then you can become a mad person. Then
your sex can be a problem. Today the sex of
modern people is such a problem. We should
face it. Perhaps you do not know that what
a percentage of American young people are
impotent today. They are impotent. The more
you become impotent a viscous circle is created,
and to you sex becomes so important that you
think you have to become just a sex point.
No more a human being but a sex point. All
the time you talk of sex, sex, sex, sex. What
is the need? It is such a simple thing. Every
animal knows, everyone knows. Nobody is given
education about it. In India we never talk
about it, we are producing much more children
than you are producing here.   There’s
also another reason why we produce more children
is: the load has to be on us, because children
don’t want to be born here. The conditions
are so bad. In England two children are killed
... two children - can you believe it? ... it’s
announced - two children are killed every
week by parents. I mean I can’t think of
one parent in India who will do that- one!
And we have poverty, we have everything. But
no mother can kill her own child, I mean,
even if she had twelwe children, she wouldn’t
mind. Mind is not the thing, she loves them.
She can’t afford to lose even one child
out of them. I mean it is another extreme
we have, like we can even sell our country
for our children sake. We are to that limit.
You see, some of the people who are so attached
to their children that they don’t mind.
For their children’s sake they can sell
their country and that’s going to another
extreme.
But, I must say that children would like to
be born in India, not here. So we are carrying
the load upon ourselves. But, the main thing
is our sex ideas are really being conditioned
by this so-called deconditioner. When they
say, “Do not condition yourself,” actually
they decondition you, they think, but they
are conditioning you much more by saying,
“Do this, do that.” You see, sex, you
don’t have to run away from that. You don’t
have to get out from that. Not at all. But
sane ideas must be developed about sex and
you have to lead a very good married life.
Married life is the blessing, blessing of
the Goddess on you. Is Gruha Lakshmi. The
way you treat your women, the women treat
you. I mean it’s a reaction, you see. The
men treated them so shabbily, now the women
are becoming mad here. I must say they are
getting mad. You can’t live without men.
How can you live without them? It’s impossible.
If you think you can live without men, you
are sadly mistaken. It’s a wrong idea, you
cannot. And men can’t live without women.
Now you might say there are people ... I was
amazed also, another amazing thing I heard
was that sixty-five per cent people in California
are homosexuals. Is something shocking. Another
thing it is. Because it’s perversion. Now
why it happens?    I had a boy in New
York who came to Me, who was like a boy, he
had mustaches, everything, was talking like
a woman, you know. I said, “What’s wrong
with this fellow?” First I didn’t understand,
you know, then they told Me, “Mother, he’s
something like that, it is that and that,
that.” I said, “All right.” But actually
he was possessed by a woman. He was possessed
by a woman. I removed that possession and
he said, “Now I feel like man,” and he
started walking in a different way all together.
He changed his gait and everything and he
was walking in a different way. Just imagine,
it was just a possession of a woman on him.
So he was behaving like a woman and he was
seeking a company of a man instead of a woman
which he should seek. That’s the normal
thing to do, and he became abnormal. Now when
they became abnormal, nobody is there to protect
it, nobody is going to tell them that this
is abnormal. This is nothing that you should
say, “This is sin, this is illegal.” Nobody
is going to listen to that. If you tell human
beings “This is wrong,” they will sit
on your head, they will never do it. Never
tell them “This is wrong.” Tell them “This
is right, go ahead with it” and they’ll
suffer, they’ll come back. This is the way
our modern society is working towards you.
“All right, you want homosexuality? Permitted.
You want killing? Permitted. Whatever you
want, you do it.” They have a feeling behind
them that once you allow them to do what they
like, either they’ll be finished completely
once for all, headache is gone, or once they
realize, they’ll come back to normalcy.
I think this must be the basics for everybody
not going into it and finding out that sixty-five
per cent people are suffering from such an
absurd thing which is not at all joy giving,
it’s never joy giving. It’s just ego pampering.
Because some women told Me, “Mother, these
men are so dominating and they are so horrid,
and that’s why we should not have anything
to do with them. All right. And they try to
push us here and there and they try to harass
us so we have nothing to do with them. We’ll
have ladies together.” I said, “That’s
not the way. You should know how to handle
them.” They are very sweet. Oh, they are
extremely sweet, you see, you should know
how to handle them. They are like children.
Absolutely like children. But you have to
be a real mother to understand them. They
are so sweet you can’t imagine. They are
extremely sweet and good people. Same about
men, I would say, that the way they see the
women are sort of dominating them and all
that. There are ways of handling the women
of that kind also. You can manage that. You
see, you have forgotten the sweet methods
of romance. You see, now the romance depends
on the wig you wear. If a woman is wearing
a particular type of a wig, the man falls
in love; she changes the wig, the love is
finished. These kind of artificial ideas if
you have about your relationship with each
other - if it is the hair you like, if it
is the eyes you like and all that - it will
not last. But the feeling that we belong to
each other, just we belong to each other and
we have to love each other, then you don’t
see these defects in each other, you don’t
find these problems, not at all. I mean, you
need not be with your husband all the time
but you enjoy the separation and then you
enjoy also the meeting. It’s not that if
you are away from him, then you are [posted?],it’s
not at all. It’s a really sweet thing that
happens to you, and can happen to all of you
when you are realized. Once you are realized,
you come to such a normal position that the
whole thing normalizes, you see. bBecause
that’s an absolute point. That’s the thing
that takes away all your imbalances, all your
problems and you really know what is love,
what is enjoyment.    This Gregoire
is the one who came here, did all kinds of
nonsensical things here, you know. Today he
was telling to Me, the other day that, “Mother,
you are the master of fitting all the pieces
together in a very nice integrated manner.“
And it’s true that it is the Spirit in you
that does that, it just brings back everything
that [was?] looking so ugly and so disintegrated
into one beautiful [full?]. And all the romances
that you have heard of ... now he’s such
a romance for his wife, you know, he is so
romantic that nobody can believe that he’s
a modern man. A modern man is not supposed
to be romantic about his wife; he can be romantic
about anybody else’s wife, but not his own.
So this is the absurdity of our ideas
about love. This is [NOT CLEAR] your own.
Why not enjoy your own things instead of enjoying
somebody else’s thing. Like in India, you
see, supposing you get an Indian, he may be
a thug, he may come to your house and run
away with your things, you know. May run away
with all your things, that you have [collected?].
But if you get another one, a western man
in the house, he’ll run away with your wife
only. You don’t know what he will do. He’ll
talk very sweetly and run away with a wife.
And he will think, “Oh, I’ve done such
a great thing. She loves me.” And he is
not bothered as to the whole system of the
family is finished, the whole thing is finished.
Like we had one boy, a journalist, he was
twenty-six-year-old and his friend was twenty-four-year-old,
and he invited the friend to his house. The
mother was forty-eight-year-old and she ran
away with the friend. And four children were
left behind, and the father didn’t know
what to do. She had a divorce and she got
the house divided. The children are thrown
to places. I mean this is absurd. How can
you do it? And she came to Me, “Oh, I’m
in love with him, Mother.” I said, “This
little boy who is younger to your son. How
can you be in love? Are you mad?” She must
be mad to believe in such a thing. And the
fellow was interested in her money, perhaps,
maybe. I don’t know what he was interested.
But they were in love, supposed to be in love.
I don’t know what sort of a love is this
one. See, how can you be in love with your
great-grand-children. It’s absurd. You know
this is so absurd, you see, these eighty-year-old
people trying to copy with you. Going in a
pub and dancing like you with the shaking
hands and everything shaking and collapsing
next moment. What is there to compete with
these young children? You are grown-up, you
are matured, you are sensible, you are sane
- enjoy that. It’s a funny thing, you see,
in these ... modernity ... we have gone very
much away from reality. That’s why we are
away from joy and enjoyment.    All
right, so this is it that sex is to be used
for its right purpose and to be used at its
right point, means at the Mooladhara. Christ
said one thing. He said, it is written, ”Thou
shall not to commit adultery.” I say, “Thou
shall not have adulterous eyes.” Because
He knew this would happen and He is placed
at that point where He controls the eyes.
Nowadays we have started doing sex with our
eyes, this flirting business. What do you
get out of it? Looking at this girl, looking
at that girl, looking at this girl, that girl,
what are you getting? Your eyes are ruined,
Yyour attention is ruined. You are finished
and [fagged?] up. And by the time you have
seen twenty girls, you sit down and say, “Haah.”
This is the best way to age. And then you
go to beauty clinics and try to look younger.
See, what is the need to look at these girls
like this? They are all your sisters. Have
purity in your heart. There is no need to
waste your attention [so much?]. There is
no need to waste your attention. For an Indian
would be looking at the things, and you will
be looking at the women or the men. You finish
your choice at a point. You finish it and
enjoy it. Even in guru shopping you do the
same thing. You have come to Me now, I have
told you the truth. But tomorrow another guru
comes in, “Let’s go and have a look.”
If you have that kind of a frivolous idea
about yourself, Sahaja Yoga is not going to
work out in you. You have to settle down with
it. You have to work it out. Your Spirit is
to be completely uncovered and is to be brought
into complete consciousness of yours. You
should really become the master. Unless and
until you are master, you should not give
in. And don’t go to these people just to
look at them because you spoil your attention.
So doing sex with your thinking leads you
to impotency. If you have to eat food with
your mouth, you start eating with your nose,
the mouth will be finished because it’s
frozen and the nose will be finished too,
and you won’t be eating either. Whatever
things have to do, whatever ways, you should
allow that organ to work out that thing. So
that’s why the spontaneity in sex is lost.
You think about it, plan about it. How can
you plan, I just can’t understand. You plan
about everything that is so spontaneous and
that’s why there is such a problem. And
people talk here as if sex is something out
of the blue. It is just there, it exists and
you don’t have to learn about it. It is
all there. And to talk about it also it is
not necessary. It is your own private. It’s
absolutely private and sacred thing between
you and your wife. That’s all. Nothing beyond,
nothing before. It’s a very sacred thing.
The more sacred it is the more you enjoy it.
I’ve known people in India who are ninety
years of age and still very potent. One gentleman
came to tell Me that, “Mother, my wife has
died and I’m still … I don’t know.”
I said, “It’s all right.” I told him,
“How do you manage?” He said, “I’m
living ... in her separation I’m living.”
That’s how they live. And they manage themselves.
While here the people at a very young age
just become exhausted and finished.   So
we have to understand that in Sahaja Yoga,
you try, it will work out. It works out. Also
gradually your attention will be stationed.
You will be very much in the center and you
will develop your innocence in such a beautiful
manner. You get back your innocence [INAUDIBLE].
Can you believe it? [Completely?] you become
so innocent and so simple that you are amazed
at yourself.
Your innocence is there as far as money is
concerned, no doubt still you are intact on
that point. On that point Indians are not.
You are innocent as far as material things
are concerned. For example, you don’t mind
giving all the money to these horrible gurus
as long as you get your realization. But there
I think innocence is not stupidity. How can
you give money for your realization? I mean
it’s a simple thing. You must understand
you cannot pay money for your realization,
one thing you must understand. Anybody who
says, “Now I’ve got vibrations.” Some
people go to someone and feel heated up. Then
they want feeling heated up more and more
and more. This heat is coming from that man
and is going to increase your heat all the
time, and it is going to increase and increase
and increase and your chakras are going to
be ruined completely by this [fellow?]. It
has to be reduced. It has to come to the cooling
point, and you must feel the cooling point.
If you cannot feel the cooling point, then
you must know that this man is absolutely
wrong.
When you are feeling heat here, now for example,
it is because the cleansing is taking place.
Once the cleansing is over the cool breeze
must flow in, and you must feel the cool breeze.
Now some people might feel absolutely cold,
just like frozen. That’s also not a good
sign; that means you are left-sided .Some
of you may feel that kind of a thing. It’s
not the feeling the cold is the point, is
the feeling the cool breeze, is a breeze like
feeling that you get. From My photograph also
you will get. That’s the way you have to
judge yourself. You judge yourself, establish
yourself, keep your chakras clean and you’ll
be amazed how you become a master of the whole
art. You will be able to give realization,
each one of you to thousands of people.    So
now in the second chakra when we come, I would
say is the chakra of your seeking. And we
call that as the second chakra, because the
third chakra comes out of it. Is the chakra
in which you seek. It starts from very, very
beginning when you were a human being you
did not realize that you came to this stage
in thousands and thousands and thousands of
years. First of all as any animal what you
do is to seek God in food. You just seek food.
You are seeking food and you want to eat,
and the whole thing is at Nabhi level, is
at this point where you are just seeking the
food, how to nourish yourselves, how to look
after yourselves. The second seeking later
on starts. Some of the animals start becoming
more alert by understanding that you have
to be more intellect, so they start seeking
in power. They want to empower other animals
and try to overcome them so that they can
eat them, so they seek in power. Then the
seeking goes even subtler and subtler, that
they start seeking in money, as human being
starts seeking in money, in possessions and
things. Animals don’t have possessions,
thank God. Because possessions means headache.
You have to have insurance, you have to have
this, you have to have that. So the human
beings start getting the possessions and all
these things and they start going into this
seeking. But the last and the foremost seeking
is of the very evolved, is the seeking of
the Spirit, the seeking of God. This is the
real thing that should happen to us. When
you are at that point, at that point of maturity,
then this happening takes place.    Now
the other center that is coming out of that
one is - actually it’s not shown here but
it comes out of that - is the center called
as Swadhisthana, is the center by which you
think, you organize for the future. You think,
you organize for the future, you work out
your action through it. Like we think, think,
think, think all the time what we do is nothing
but think. I mean planning is such a curse
that we don’t do anything about it, we just
plan and keep it in the book.”Oh, we have
planned it.” They think, “We have planned
it,” it’s done already. It’s not so.
Now this thinking gives us a realm of future
into which we enter in. When we start thinking,
we do not know how we imbalance ourselves.   In
this area resides the principle of the Primordial
Masters as Gregoire has told you. Now, when
you start thinking, this center - the one
you see, the yellow colored center - transforms
the fat from your stomach for the use of your
brain. Now people are so much against fat
these days that it would be really dangerous
to talk for it. Now from where are you to
get the replacement of your brain cells, tell
Me, if you are not going to consume any fat?
As it is your livers are out so whatever fat
you take, you take any amount of fat, you
will not have any weight, try, because that
fat is the reserve for your brain which thinks
all the time. Do you know that this brain
is made of fat cells? Do you know this or
not? Is nothing but fat cells. In Sanskrit
it’s called as the medh. And the whole thing
is called medhi, even the brain. Even your
nerves are made of the fat cells. Now when
you don’t take it, any form of fat, any
form of fat whatsoever ... I mean I’m told
that lots of butter is lying here wasted.
I don’t say you eat the mountain of it,
no, no. What I’m saying if you don’t take
it at all any fat, then what you do is to
make your body starve for the fat that is
needed for one of the purposes is the brain
and for your nerves. If you don’t take fat
in the body you will be a nervous person.
What is the supplement for your nerves? What
are you going to supply? That’s why you
find, you see, mostly to make it out a westerner
and an Indian is very easy. You make them
stand before any calamity. All right. Indian
will be silently watching. The another would
be going into complete this “Haa, haa, huu,
huu, hee.” Everything will be coming out,
or the eyes will be twisting, the nose will
be going up and down and ears will be going
out like that. They’llbe all nervous. The
reason is your nerves do not have any sustenance
in it. That’s lost because you just don’t
take any fat. Take little bit, I’m not saying
the mountains, you see, if I say something,
you may jump into the mountain of fat. That’s
not the point. But just to avoid completely
the fat is a wrong idea - creates an imbalance.
Now this poor center has to do double job.
Firstly it has to supply the fat to the brain,
secondly it has to look after your liver on
the right hand side, when it moves to the
left hand side your pancreas, your spleen,
your kidneys and uterus.   All these
things this poor thing has to do. Now if you
are thinking, thinking, thinking all the time,
then it is trying to find out all the fat
[globules?] it can get from everywhere to
supply [them?] in the brain. All right. And
if it does not get that, then it is a dangerous
thing. But even if it gets it, then it is
creating a problem for the other organs which
it has to look after. That’s how people
get diabetes. You don’t get diabetes because
you eat sugar. Is a wrong idea altogether.
I don’t know for why the doctors have started
this kind of a thing. For example, in India
people take sugars at least half a kilo of
sugar per day in the villages, at least minimum.
They eat more sugar than they eat rice, take
it from Me. But nobody has diabetes. Why?
Because they don’t think. Whatever sugar
they take is used for their liver. Now if
you do not give your liver any sugar ... now
ask anyone ... How the liver acts? Liver is
the one that takes out all your poison. Now
this poison is to be taken out of the liver
by water. Now if you take the water and drink
on top of that, what happens that the hydrogen
becomes heavier, I mean there’s H3 added
to it and the whole system of H2O which has
to be neutral becomes like this, and you can’t
receive any heat into it. So the whole heat,
which is the poison, accumulates in the liver,
you get all kinds of liver problems, all kinds
of liver problems. Practically most of the
western people have liver problems but they
don’t know it till they discover it. Till
they are absolutely on the verge of something
very fatal, they do not discover about liver.
Now this hydrogen which pulls it down, you
see, becomes like an arrow, doesn’t receive
anything from the liver, the heat, and such
a person never gets any temperature. Even
cancer acts the same way. In cancer also,
the H goes down very much though it’s a
left-sided problem, which I’ll tell you.
But same thing happens that the heat of the
body cannot be taken out by water. So the
water becomes a heavy water, you can say.
But after realization, the hydrogen goes up
like that. And you receive all the heat, and
people who have bad liver feel terrible heat
on the right hand side.    Now you have
to take carbohydrates to neutralize that heat.
You have to take carbohydrates. Now, if you
don’t like sugar, eat rice. I mean if there’s
some sort of a thing on your head. This also
is an enterprise, I must tell you, these food
stores are also another enterprise which is
very, very subtle. Very subtle enterprise.
You see, as you had other enterprises of the
gurus. Then you had of holidays, you see.
Some idea must have come. Then this hip … what
you [call it?] singers, musicians, [who were?]
four of them, Beatles. You know the one who
created them, Beatles, his uncle has told
Me the story how he did it. It was all maneuvering
to begin with, and that maneuvering made people
mad. And that madness is still on. You see,
people go on into that. It’s all auto-suggestion
and all those things they work it out, they
are psychologists, you see. And they know
how to maneuver people and how to dominate
them. They know. And they [maneuver?] it.
They work it out on your weaknesses like you
do not [know about?] food. Now some of the
health food I ate, it was not for human beings,
it was for buffalos, I felt. Really. Some
of the foods were so hard and so harsh, I
got such a pain in My stomach. I said, “Now
this is not for human beings, this is for
buffalos.” You are not buffalos. You are
human beings, you have to eat food which is
digestible to your stomach. Of course, that
doesn’t mean you should use this white bread
- of course, that is not the thing - which
makes your liver completely sort of ... or
you can say the intestines sluggish. But you
should not eat all the harder, of such a hard
things like everything you cut because you
want to preserve the vitamins. You will cut
everything and eat everything like that. Japanese
are the worst [on this?]. Japanese are the
worst. I mean there is nothing that they don’t
eat. They eat everything that you could think
of. I mean you can’t eat the food the way
they eat. First thing they served Me on a
very special banquet, where the princess was
there and all that, was a shell with all these
moss around it. You see, for us Indians as
it is a little fussy about these things and,
My daughter said, “What is in there?”
[INAUDIBLEAnd they said, “live thing”.?]
I said, “live.” We were all frightened,
“What is live?” They said oyster or something
is live inside. And they poked it and it started
doing like that and, you see. Oh God, how
do you eat it? And the Japanese just twisted
it out and ate it off, you see. And they eat
everything wrong. There was a boy who was
eating peanuts. We asked him, “What are
you eating?” He said, “I’m eating these
frogs. He was just peeling them up and eating
them nicely. Can you imagine? This is the
way they eat their food which is not meant
for the human body. You have to cook, but
your women are so busy with liberation, they
don’t cook. They don’t cook. You should
learn to cook to handle your husbands. You
see, if you know how to cook, it’s very
simple.    In our Sahaja Yoga center
we teach them how to cook, because if you
know cooking [you are the master?]. You see,
people are, men are really so simple [INAUDIBLE]
I cook very well, I’m an excellent cook
I should say. But a gentleman came to see
Me, he was a German and he told Me that there
was one chairman of a [car company?], that
he told me, “If you want to eat the best
chicken, ask Mrs. Srivastava to cook” - that’s
My another name - “and She’s an excellent
cook.” I was surprised to have this reputation
all over that I cook so well chicken. And
he came all the way, you see, and he brought
the chicken with him. And he came all the
way to cook with Me and to eat it and he was
a very big man also himself. I was amazed,
you see, that just to learn how to cook the
chicken. He said, “My wife doesn’t know
how to cook.” Just imagine how helpless
he was. All men are helpless as far as food
is concerned. If you give them good food,
you see ... they may say, “Oh, we can eat
whatever we like,” but it’s not so. If
you know their taste and things and if you
know how to handle them, it’s very easy
to handle them. Like, somebody told Me, “Indian
men are very great cowards.” I said, “Why?”
“Because they don’t know how to cook that’s
why they don’t divorce.” Imagine to say
such a thing. It’s not that. They are very
wise. What’s the use of changing every day
a wife, you see. One wife is ... she knows
all about your habits, she knows everything,
she knows how to cook for you. It’s a good
idea, we carry on very well as companions.
Every time if you change, God knows, she may
come as a shrew, she may come as anything.
You may lose your head with somebody, another
may break your hand and another may break
your leg. It’s better to know one and handle
her for this lifetime so next time at least
you don’t face that type. It’s very simple
and wise way of living together, to understand
that in one lifetime only if you live with
one person, you develop that love, that attention,
that understanding because human being basically
are very good. If you live with somebody for
two days, you will just see the superficial
things of that person. That may not be good.
So to get to the depth of a person is necessary
you live with that person with a loving care,
you see that person and you will discover
how beautiful that person is.    He’s
so beautiful sometimes that you are surprised
at [INAUDIBLE]. The other day I had to go
for something to a hospital. I mean, I never
go to a hospital, but something happened and
doctors were after my life, “You must do
this, You must do that.” And My husband
couldn’t see that, you see, he was so upset.
He had never seen Me like that. So he went
back to his office, he put his head like this
and he was sitting there, didn’t do any
work or anything. When he came back, I was
angry with him. I said, “What do you mean
by not being here. I was here and there were
other people and ...” But actually I knew
what he was doing. So I went and told him,
“I know you ran away, you coward, you couldn’t
stand here.” He said, “It’s true, you
know, I couldn’t see it.” And then his
secretary told Me, “Oh, he was horrid. He
wouldn’t talk to me, he wouldn’t allow
me to do anything.” That’s what happened.
So, to understand a man ... is such a great
thing to love. I don’t know if you realize
that. Is such a great thing to love, to give.
It’s much greater than to have. Giving,
I don’t know if you have tried or not. All
My life, I’ve done nothing but giving. And
I think I feel so happy about it. The real
source of happiness lies in giving only not
in taking [anything?]. It’s such a great
thing to give, give, give, give. And you’ll
be amazed you’ll have no dearth of it. That
is what one has to understand. But to think
about what things I should preserve, what
things I should give. What is there to think?
If somebody likes it, have it. Doesn’t matter.
It works out.    Now, the second center
is also of the Lakshmi center, because you
asked Me how to get the Lakshmi. Now this
is the center of Lakshmi, because Lakshmi
is the deity of this center. And the deity
actually, who is the male side of it, the
one who is the kinetic side. The power is
the potential side and the kinetic side is
the male side. So, Laskhmi is the power of
Narayana. Narayana is the deity, whom you
call as Vishnu. That’s why Vishnu only incarnates.
Because He comes for our seeking, He incarnates.
He incarnates to give us our higher awareness.
Always the Vishnu incarnates for the aspects
of the human [kind?]. And that’s how we
have been evolving one after another. For
example, when Noah’s ark was built, it was
Vishnu who came in the form of a dolphin fish
and saved that Noah’s ark. And that’s
how we were saved. Then a tortoise form it
came in, to make the fishes come to the shore
and start crawling on the Mother Earth. Like
that a leader is always born, and that leader
is the aspect of God, is the incarnation.
Now, many may say, “We don’t believe in
it.” So many are like that, “We don’t
believe in it, don’t believe in that, don’t
believe in that. We believe in this and we
believe in this.” Now how can you say that?
First of all know that you say this because
you are conditioned for something. You have
a fixation. When you say “I believe in it”
or you say “I don’t believe in it”,
you have not reached your absolute awareness,
have you? How can we judge? You cannot judge.
So, you have to become that. Once you become
that, you just put your hands and ask the
question, “Was Vishnu an incarnation? Was
[He?] the aspect of incarnation that gives
us our realization?” You’ll start getting
more breeze and more breeze. And then you
will know that it is so. But this fact about
Vishnu, that He exists, you will only know
after your realization. When you raise the
Kundalini, and if the Kundalini stops at this
point of Nabhi, then you have to take His
name. If you don’t take His name, it won’t
rise. That’s why the mantra is a very big
science. To know first of all how the Kundalini
is moving. You can say the mantra is like
- give it very gross example - is like a toll
that you pay at every point. So, when you
go up to a gate, now you have to pass through
that, then you pay a toll. But somebody gives
you a mantra before realization, it has no
meaning. Because you have not started moving
as yet. If your car has not started moving
as yet, how can you pay the toll? Whom are
you paying the toll? You are just paying the
toll to the guru who is nonsensical. You have
to go to that point where your Kundalini has
stopped. Which you can see yourself and feel
it. And then at that point, you have to raise
the Kundalini higher by saying that particular
mantra. Then at higher level and at higher
level. How the mantra is to be said there
is a science. This all can become yours in
no time at all. In within one month’s time
you all will be experts of Sahaja Yoga. Take
it from Me. When I went to Australia, I was
hardly there for a month I think, and within
fifteen days, you see, these people from television
and all that they came to see Me.
And they said, ”re Your disciples all scholars?”
I said, “Not at all. Who told you they are
scholars?”
“Oh, they know so much!”
I said, ”Because they have become knowledge
now.” You start learning from others when
you start giving Kundalini awakening and all
that. You start learning what’s happening,
where is it going, how it is working out,
how to maneuver. Unless and until you start
driving the car, how will you become the master
of the car? In the same way, you have to know
everything, working it out, not thinking about
it. Then people start analyzing: how can this
be, how can that be? It’s not analysis,
is actual working. Actually you work it out.
The thing flows from your hand, and you are
amazed, “Oh God, the Kundalini is rising!”
Yes, you can see it’s come up. You can give
realization. Those who got realization yesterday,
today you can give realization. What do you
say to that? You are that fantastic. You are
that fantastic. That know, that you should
not be shifty people. They say that Americans
are very, very shifty people. And be careful
of this character. [So?See?] everybody has
a sign. Like that, you have a sign that you
are shifty. While English are hard nuts. So,
be careful. Do not be shifty. Settle down
on your own Spirit. Work it out. Learn about
it and fix it up.    I’m happy to
see Michael has come all the way from Los
Angeles. I was sorry I couldn’t ring you.
The other day I was feeling very sorry. [And
to?] see you here I was so [heart-contended?]
and so happy that you have come here to work
it out. You see, that’s how it should be.
All right. So, then we go, I mean there’s
so much to be said about every center. And
you know that I have given at least five hundred
lectures in London alone. And there are tapes
of My lectures. These are available. I mean
we don’t make any profits as usual, but
you must [also not?] exploit us by taking
the free tapes. You should pay for the tape
itself, all right, the price of the tapes,
and you can get the tapes from these people.
We’ll send you. You can copy it and give
it to others the way you want to spread it.
You can do it. There’s no restriction on
anything, but one thing is definite that you
should not sell it at the profit. As I do
not sell it for profit, you also don’t sell
it for profit. There is no exploitation of
the disciple and no exploitation of the poor
Guru Who is standing before you.    Now,
before we go to the another center which is
very important within us. Is the center ... I
don’t think I’ll be able to finish it
today, the whole thing, but at this point
I’ll stop, and tomorrow I’ll talk about
these two other centers and the Spirit. All
right? Tonight, I’m sorry, tonight. So,
this center is the center of heart. Here the
Jagadamba, the Mother of the Universe resides.
The one who is alone. She’s alone. She doesn’t
have any male deity with Her. She’s alone.
She’s the Mother. And She looks after the
people who are struggling in this ocean of
illusion. She’s the one who is the protector.
She incarnates. It’s said that She has incarnated
thousand times but She has incarnated [million?]
times. Now this Jagadamba is the one who resides
there at that point. And when you are a child,
say about twelwe years of age, She creates
the antibodies in the sternum bone. And these
antibodies spread into the whole body and
protect you from the outer problems. Now,
those people who have the problem of this,
especially in ladies, comes from insecurities
in life. If you are insecure, then you get
the palpitation and such women at the extreme
can develop breast cancer. If you can re-establish
this, breast cancer can be cured in no time.
Now the other centers which are important,
this is of the Father and the Mother on both
the sides. Now the Father, is on the right
hand side, is the one by Shri Rama. Shri Rama
and Sita who came on this earth. They are
not standing in the center, so you can see
it very clearly that They are not worried
about the evolution part of it. But They came
on this earth to establish the right conduct
of a person especially in the political and
economic field of life. How to be an ideal
a philosopher or you can say a benevolent
king? He tried to establish the symbol of
that, Shri Rama. And those people who suffer
from father’s problem – supposing the
father has died very early - they have this
problem. And the symptom of that is you get
asthma. You develop asthma. If you have any
problem of the father, if your father has
died early or your father is torturing you
or you have no respect for your father, if
you are a bad father, I mean, the fatherhood
itself, when it is challenged, you get these
problems and asthma develops. Asthma, what
you call that, a breathing problems. It could
be with the combination of that right side
heart and also Vishuddhi, but mostly it is
the right side heart. It could combine with
the Vishuddhi.
Now, the left hand side is the Mother’s
thing, is the Parvati, is the wife of Sadashiva,
which resides there in Her form as the Mother
Annapoorna or She is the one who is the giver
of food. She gives you food. When She is in
you, you find that if you cook for two people,
it will last for as many as who want to eat
that. It’s like that. This is the deity
that comes when it is awakened it works out.
Now when this Swadhisthana Chakra is governed
by Brahmadeva and Saraswati. Those who are
students, for them it is essential to get
this, because they are the Gods and Goddesses
of your arts like music, dancing and all those
things. Also, they give you the power of truth
in the sense that if you have a good Swadhisthana,
then if you say something, it comes out true.
Your vani, means your tongue, your vani, your
voice, your tongues that you speak becomes
the truth. Is the power of this one. With
the Lakshmi Tattwa, as I told you, you get
your affluence. Wherever you go, you bring
affluence. You go to any house, people get
affluence. You touch anything, people become
better off, all the problems go out. And if
you have problems on this, whatever you may
try, you will never get rich. It will be always
a problem and you’ll have sort of losses
and things like that.    Now the left
side Nabhi is the Nabhi which you catch very
often here because of drugs. Now I must warn
you that left side Nabhi gives you also problem
with money. Always with money. Because if
you have got left side problem, the Lakshmi
just disappears. She just disappears. If you
go more on to the left hand side it is even
worse. So alcoholism and all these things
take you to a state where you start losing
money and you can become very much poor with
that. So the poverty comes in with that kind
of thing. The right side Nabhi is the one
that gives you liver problems and gives you
a very dominating nature, maybe, or a temperament
by which you get very much angry. Left side
Nabhi has another very serious problem, which
is a very serious one, where if your spleen
gets affected, for example people who are
very jerky type, they are having their food
then they are running to the work. This can
happen to the people who are right-sided also,
because they are very speedy people. They
are working and then they want to eat the
food at the same time, think about something.
They attend to many things at the same time.
And this spleen has to look after all the
emergencies and has to supply the blood cells.
Because of this kind of a frantic temperament
of a person, what happens is the spleen becomes
frantic, and then the serious disease like
blood cancer comes in. Moreover this is nothing,
because there is an anti-Christ, who has come
in this country, settled down here. He’s
a regular 666 who gives you also blood cancer.
So it’s a very serious thing and all these
things only takes place when you are not aware
of it. You do not know. It can be cured completely
with Sahaja Yoga, no doubt. It can be cured
by your Kundalini awakening. That’s the
only way you can cure, Sahaja Yoga. There
is no other way out. But you have to first
of all know how to manage your Kundalini,
how to raise it. But the first thing you have
to do is to give up some of your fixations
you have because it’s a new venue you are
entering into. And like any scientist you
should keep yourself open, absolutely open,
and see for yourself and know for yourself
that you have to understand everything, everything
in such a way that it should be logical. It
should be logical and through your vibratory
awareness, not by your thinking. First you
understand it and logically you will see it
is true.    So it is you who judge yourself,
it is you who understand everything, it is
you who grow and it is you the one who grows,
sees also things. So I leave it to you, all
these things to happen to you. Within your
own wisdom and in your own freedom all these
things should be done. But just now I won’t
say, “Don’t do this and don’t do that.”
You’ll just give up, just like that. Because
once you find your Spirit, you are never bored,
you have no time. You are enjoying yourself
so much; you have no time for anything, even
for smoking you forget. That’s how I’m
a very tricky person. I said no use telling
them,”Don’t do.” Otherwise they’ll
never come to My programs. Let them come,
and then I’ll manage. Then you’ll start
really saving money on these nonsensical things,
nonsensical habits that you have got. You
want to get rid of them, it just works out.
So for the time being I think today is all
right but in the evening time, I’ll tell
you all the rest of it. And we have got luckily
here two persons who have agreed to stay - she
was in London and Michael was with Me - who
are deciding to stay in Santa Cruz. It is
she who brought Me here. It is she who gave
all these ideas. I mean it is [now?] her responsibility
to see that you all are put onto the right
path, and that without challenging your ego
she should do it because it can be dangerous
also. Because she is one of you so you may
not like it, her telling you something. So
don’t mind, you’ll become like her also.
Don’t feel that there is something aggressive
about her. That is very important because
with Me it’s all right because first of
all I’m a Mother and also I’m something
different, but for her you will think she’s
just like you. So, doesn’t matter, you will
become like her and you can also give realization
to many.    Thank you very much. May
God bless you. So, any questions? I’ll answer
them.    Seeker: “When You were talking
about the second chakra [is that the one?]
that is green here.”   Shri Mataji:
No. The one that is yellow color, you see,
which gives us the [INAUDIBLE] the second
chakra. [But?] it goes round, [you know?],
it’s like a lotus. Have you seen a lotus
[stem?] which has got a stalk? The stalk is
in the third chakra. It comes out of there.
And it goes round all over, it supplies everywhere,
it can bend down. So this is the chakra which
is flexible one, Swadhisthan. Which is actually
the Star, Star of David. The Star of David.
It’s the one which Moses and all these ... things
they have built it up. All that ... this crossing
of this represents the crossing of Moses [INAUDIBLE]
the river that He crossed, of the sea you
can say. All that is represented here ecause
it’s the Sea of Illusion you cross. It’s
the work of Moses Himself. It’s Star of
David”   Seeker: Will You explain
the difference between self-consciousness
and Self-realization?    Sahaja yogi:
The difference between self-consciousness
and Self-realization.   Shri Mataji:
I don’t know what is self-consciousness.
But Self-realization and self-knowledge is
the same. But self-consciousness what I learnt,
My own Indian English, I would say is that
you are very conscious of yourself. That you
are very particular about your body and you
are .... There is another word for that in
English language. Is that vanity? Something.
That’s different. Self-knowledge, atma boddha,
knowledge of the Self.    One by one,
all right. One here, one there, all right.
Seeker: Last night I went home I
would feel like [vomiting.?] [NOT CLEAR].And
I went home and I went to bed to go to sleep.
It was terrifying.”    Shri Mataji:
Why? What happened?   Seeker: Well,
I was having nightmares.   Shri Mataji:
[INAUDIBLE]The first day you may have. Because,
you see, there are spirits around and they
will try to dissuade you.    Seeker:
What came was an image of my mother and she
was killing herself.    Shri Mataji:
Your mother?   Seeker: Yeah.    Shri
Mataji: It can be anything. You see, what
happens sometimes when you sleep, I mean,
you must have had first of all very deep sleep,
that’s [when it?one thing?] happens, but
when you come out of that sleep sometimes
you pass [through?]your subconscious area
in the beginning. And the impressions that
you [have at?] in your sushupti, means in
the deeper sleep, are not there. But you just
remember what you have seen in your present
subconscious mind, you see, and you touch
that. But afterwards you get rid of it. No
problem. It happens.    Seeker: Also
I wanna ask You a question about ... You said
last night about drinking ... And when people
become alcoholics, are they possessed by negative
forces?    Shri Mataji: They could be
very much.   Seeker: Ok.   Shri
Mataji: Because they go to the left side.
You see, if you drink, you go to the left
side. You are in a vulnerable state. Then
because you enter into an area which is unknown
to you, is the collective subconscious, and
people can attack you, you see. It is possible.
Like Michael himself could tell you. After
realization he started seeing them, the way
they were there. He could see them. And then
he could fight them better because if you
become something else, you can fight them
better, you see. Otherwise they are in you,
till you become mad, you don’t know they
are there.    Seeker: Also, is that
passed down from mummy to child?   Shri
Mataji: Very much. Very much. Very much, no
doubt. You see, you share them even from your
friends sometimes. That’s what people don’t
know when they deal with other psyches and
things like that. They don’t know that there
is a way of protecting yourself from this.
You have to protect. It’s very subtle. They
are just like diseases. They spread and they
can attack you. They can get into you. It’s
very simple. It happens. Like I tell you,
he and his wife, now, they just announced
their marriage. And she had been to some clairvoyances
and all that. They were all in her. She didn’t
know. She got her realization all right. The
day the marriage was announced, they couldn’t
bear it, that happiness of his wife, you see.
So they all came back on her and she got so
possessed, she started looking like a mad,
talking like a mad. It was a big problem.
They had to come to London to get it all right.   Yes
they are there. You can fight it out. No,
not difficult. We know the[NOT CLEAR] [technique
of doing it?], all right. So just don’t
worry. It will [all?][be all right.?]   [There?],
one by one. Now this gentleman, what have
you to say?   Seeker: Yesterday You
talked about Your body is a temple of gods,
and I noticed that You were drinking coca
cola. [INAUDIBLE]What is that You like about
it?   Shri Mataji: It’s perfectly
all right with Me, , I can even take poison.
No problem. You don’t compare yourself with
Me, all right. I have to take poison also;
I have to do all these things. So don’t
compare yourself with Me. But this coca cola
is not so bad as people talk, I can tell you.
It used to be very bad. Before that they were
making, about say two years back, I couldn’t
take that. But there is nothing wrong with
it. I think it’s sort of a … also I feel,
I don’t know, but maybe some sort of a enmity.
It’s sort of an enmity that it is very popular,
maybe people are trying to say something.
But nothing goes wrong with Me when I take
it. If it was poison, I would know it’s
poison. But there’s nothing so wrong with
it. Because, you see, I don’t know whatever
they give Me, I drink, I don’t mind. But
of course not the alcohol. Even if I take
alcohol, nothing will happen to Me. But I
would not take it because I don’t need it
at all. I’m already in the Spirits.    I
don’t need it. But now, [I would take it?].
I don’t think there is wrong with this coca
cola. It used to be bad once upon a time.
I would say about year back or so. I never
liked it. But now I don’t mind because something
they added in it [INAUDIBLE] removed. There’s
some sort of a funny…   Seeker: Too
expensive to put cocaine in it now.   Shri
Mataji: Now, I don’t think they put any
cocaine. Oh they must be putting cocaine…   Seeker:
They used to.   Shri Mataji: Ha, now
this is it. All right. There’s nothing wrong
with it. That’s it. Now, how many questions?
Sahaja yogi: [INAUDIBLE] that fellow
there yet.   Shri Mataji: No, this one
is first of all which [INAUDIBLE]. Because
the seventh chakra is the chakra which has
got one thousand petals as shown here. When
you cut the brain in a transverse section
you can see it’s like petals, petals of
lotus. It is said in the Bible that, “I
will appear before you like tongues of flames,”
and these are the tongues of flames. Of course
all the chakras look like tongues of flames:
very silent, very beautiful, very soothing.
But “seeing” is not the point; “being”
is the point. If you see them, is no good.
You have to become. And becoming is that you
feel the whole thing coming out of your head.
And these have the light but you need not
see them; there’s no need to see the auras.
Only when you are disintegrated, you see the
auras. When you are integrated, you never
see any auras. It’s being experimented.
People who take drinks and all that, their
auras go like that [shaking?]. But a realized
soul, if you take the photograph of a realized
soul, there will be no aura around it. But
if you are disintegrated, for example if you
are taking LSD, you might see aura around
Me, around everyone. That’s not good. That
means you are not there. You are in the supraconscious
area, where you are seeing the elements that
are surrounding. But once you are integrated
by your realization, all these seven chakras
get integrated. In Sanskrit there’s a very
good word for integration, it is samagra means,
agra is the hole in the needle. So all the
needles have the hole, and the thread goes
through that. So all the chakras get integrated
when you get your realization. But actually
this area has got all the chakras. Now I show
you where they are. This is the Agnya as I
told you. This is the Agnya, Agnya Chakra.
This is the window of the Agnya Chakra but
inside the brain it is, Agnya Chakra.    Then
you got the Vishuddhi Chakra here, which becomes
as the Primordial Being here as the Virat.
Then is the Heart Chakra here. Then is the
Nabhi Chakra here. You can feel it. If you
have bad Nabhi you can feel the pressure.
It’s here, here, it’s here. At the back
here the whole is the Swadhisthana. And here
at this point, at this point in the center
is the Mooladhara Chakra. Now, you will be
amazed when you get diabetes, why should you
have your eyes weakened. What is the reason?
The reason is: when you get diabetes your
Swadhisthana Chakra becomes weak. As I showed
you there that you get diabetes there, down
below, by the Swadhisthana’s [exertion?].
It presses on, it presses on, in the center
of the Mooladhara. Mooladhara is here in the
center, which controls your eyes. I mean eyes
in the sense that the power to the eyes, the
light to the eyes. And once it starts oppressing
it, you start losing your eyes though the
eyes are open. Even if you are possessed.
If you are possessed, also same thing will
happen to you. You will have your eyes, but
there will be no light, you can’t see. All
these things can be cured through Sahaja Yoga.
Is very simple. The methods are very simple,
which you can learn yourself. You can cure
others. You can become the masters.    Now
about the Spirit. As I told you the Spirit
resides in your heart. It is the reflection
of the aspect of God which we call as God
Almighty or Sadashiva. Because God is one.
But one person now ... I’m one but I’m
a wife, I’m a grandmother, I’m your Mother;
I’m doing so many things. There are aspects
of God and God has got firstly the aspect
of love by which He creates the power of His
love, which is called as the Primordial Mother
or the Adi Shakti. It is the same aspect is
represented in you as the Kundalini. You’ll
be amazed that even, even the Greeks knew
about it because they called this bone as
sacrum, means the “sacred bone.” That
means they knew that it was a sacred power
there. Even Athena ... Atha in Sanskrit means
“primordial.” And if you see the photograph
of Athena or her statue ... I’ve been to
... I was so surprised in Greece that they
all speak [NOT CLEAR]. And She had this snake
in Her hand representing the energy. When
we [say of?] the snake, it is the energy,
not the devil or anything but it’s an energy.
It moves like this and so She has the snake
and also all the chakras in her hand and She’s
standing with a dress like that. That is Athena.
It’s very interesting. That place, the Delphi,
and all that was so much revealing. And, that
Delphi, they said, is the Nabhi, is the navel
of the whole universe, which is true also.
And lots of things I saw there which I have
talked in a tape which you can see for yourself.
Now this Spirit is the aspect of God which
is a witness, the God that witnesses the play
of His love. The first of all is the state
where we call it is Parabrahma where everything
is just silent and sleeping. When we are sleeping,
nothing exists for us. In the same way the
whole thing like Parambrahma, the abstract,
sleeps. Then it comes to Its awaken state.
Then It wants to ... It gets the desire to
create out of love. So, this power of His
love spreads around Him, accumulates and forms
another entity called as the Holy Ghost or
you can say the Parashakti or you can call
it also as the Primordial Mother. She’s
the Holy Ghost. Now, when the break takes
place, there’s a sound and this sound is
the logos, as you call it, the Spirit. That
sound is the divine integrated sound, not
one sound. And that one is called as Omkara,
which is the child, which is the child of
this couple, and that’s how you get the
Son of God.    Now the Spirit in us,
which is represented, is that Son of God within
us, which is the part of that, we can say,
God Almighty’s reflection within us, which
is the child in our heart, is the Spirit;
is the abstract, abstract form of that Power,
which is all pervading, is the Spirit. Now,
this is a combining thing. It has both the
things. You can see that because it is from
the combination of these a child is born.
So on one side it is the reflection of the
God Almighty. On the other side it is the
connection with the all-pervading Power, which
is the power of His love. So it is connected
on both the sides. So this Spirit is in your
heart, which [resides?decides?], is alert
all the time and knows all about you. In Gita
is called as kshetragya, “the Lord of the
field.” He knows all about you and He knows
what youare doing. It just is a witness. It
doesn’t involve into the play of what you
are doing. It‘s just watching the whole
drama as long as It wants to, otherwise, when
It is now fed up or does not want to enjoy
anymore, It just disappears. When It disappears,
you do not exist anymore. This Spirit has
got the nature of, as [he has?] told you in
the morning, Satchitananda. Sat means that
“when you become the Spirit, you become
the truth.” Now, what is the truth? Truth
is this all-pervading power. You start feeling
it. You start feeling the truth. Now, this
truth is absolute. You get connected with
it. Your attention gets enlightened. And whatever
you know through your attention by paying
attention to it, means through your vibratory
awareness, is the truth.    You put
ten children together and ask them to feel
one person who is facing [Me?]. They will
put up the same finger. That means something
wrong with his throat. Because you become
the subject. It’s not subjective but you
become the subject. You start feeling, everybody
feels the same. Now you have seen these people
who have come to help Me from Australia, Switzerland
and England and all these places. When you
come to Me, they say the same thing about
a person, “He’s catching on this, he’s
catching on that.” Everybody catches on
the same. So this all-pervading power is a
complete organization of delivering truth
to you. You ask any questions [INAUDIBLE]
whether it is true or not, you will know on
your vibratory awareness. Of course in the
beginning you have to develop the sensitivity.
Once you are sensitive to it, you can find
out the truth. So, the sat, that part, means
the brain gets enlightened. Your central nervous
system gets enlightened. That means Spirit
gives light into central nervous system, and
you start feeling It flowing. First time it
comes to your consciousness. Whatever people
may tell you that, “This is the way we give
Self-realization and all that,” just don’t
believe it. You must know that you should
have, you should have the sensitivity of feeling
that Spirit and that truth which is common
to all of you -
that it cannot be denied. Truth is only one,
it cannot be hundreds. Once you are realized,
all of them talk the same. There is no difference.
But the problem is human beings know how to
make a pickle out of everyone. That’s the
specialty of human beings. Anybody who came
on this earth, who are the realized souls,
said the same thing. There is no difference
whatsoever. But everybody started fighting
about it. Like the real flowers appear on
the tree, when they are living, they are beautiful,
fragrant and they know each other. There is
no difference between them. But somebody will
take out one, another will take out another
and say, “This is mine, this is mine,”
then they are dead. Then they say, “This
is it.” When Christ lived, nobody recognized
Him. They crucified Him. Even disciples, till
He got His resurrection. Then what’s the
use? Nobody recognized Him. All
the great people when they came here, nobody
recognized them.    Christ has said,
“Whatever you have done to Me will be forgiven,
but not to the Holy Ghost.” Because the
Holy Ghost has to give you [your?] realization.
And when you get your realization, you have
to recognize It. If you don’t recognize
, that will not be forgiven. After realization
you have to recognize. If you do not recognize,
He says it won’t be forgiven.    A
very, very great understanding is needed to
understand what is today, such a precarious
time. The Last Judgment has started. So many
great people are taking birth. So many crooks
are taking birth to harm you. It’s happening.
How will you judge yourself? How will you
judge? Are you going to be put on a balance?
Your Kundalini is going to be awakened. You
yourself will judge. Not necessary for anybody
to judge. You yourself will know whether I’m
catching on this [or?] whether I’m catching
on that. Today only one of the Sahaja yoginis
says, “Mother I’m catching on the
right heart”. All right, we’ll work it
out. Another will say, “I’m catching on
my Agnya.” Yesterday somebody was telling
Me, “Mother, take out this bhoot from my
Agnya.” Now Agnya means ego. They can feel
it, they can see it and they judge it because
they are out of it. The Spirit gives you the
truth, and you like it because the vibrations
flow. You feel so peaceful and so happy and
joyous. And you can feel others. When the
vibrations are
not there, you feel, “What’s wrong with
it? We should put it right.”And when you
know the method how
to do it, you want to do it and you want to
be that, the joy of the Spirit. Though really
felt in a big way comes later on, but it starts
trickling in. People give up all kinds of
habits automatically. I don’t tell them.
They just give up. The will power is so great
that whatever you want, you can give up. There
is no problem with it. So many people who
used to take drugs - and were druggists and
chemists, I used to call them - when they
came to Me, some of them came in coma. They
just [gave up?] without any difficulty. Because
if you discover your Spirit, you just do it.
A transformation has to take place within
you. If that doesn’t happen, it is no religion,
it is no God, it has nothing to do with your
Kundalini. And when it takes, you become so
empowered that nothing can dominate you. No
habit can dominate you. No guru can dominate
you. No ideas and fixations and all these
smaller things will dominate but
you become so powerful that
you start emitting light to others. And
people can see that light in you, that confidence
in you. Now
the chitta, chitta means “attention.”
Your attention becomes enlightened.